.xgp
.squish
.adjust
.c << text font >>
.font 0 25fr3
.c << smaller font for headings >>
.font 1 22fg
.font 2 30vrb
.font 3 40vr
.c << text is 6.25 inches wide >>
.quote 
.dummy _
.sterm |
.twinch 6.25
.sidm 50
.tl 55
.topm 60
.c << want to flush losing multiple cr's >>
.crcomp
.c << want to have at least 3 lines of a section on a page >>
.sblock 5
.spw 16


.center
2MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
.center
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE LABORATORY
.sp 3
.spread
/0AI Memo 420//September 1977/
.sp 3
.center
2DATA REPRESENTATIONS IN PDP-10 MACLISP
.sp
.center
0by
.sp
.center
__Guy Lewis Steele Jr. *
.sp 2
Abstract:
.adjust
      The internal representations of the various MacLISP data types
are presented and discussed.  Certain implementation tradeoffs
are considered.  The ultimate decisions on these tradeoffs are discussed
in the light of MacLISP's prime objective of being an efficient
high-level language for the implementation of large systems such
as MACSYMA.  The basic strategy of garbage collection is outlined,
with reference to the specific representations involved.
Certain "clever tricks" are explained and justified.
The "address space crunch" is explained and some
alternative solutions explored.
.sp 3
This paper was presented at the MACSYMA Users Conference,
Berkeley, California, July 1977.
.sp 2
.in 6
.un 6
Keywords: data types, data representations, LISP, MacLISP, garbage collection,
storage spaces, storage allocation, dynamic allocation
.in 0
.sp 8
This report describes research done at the Laboratory for Computer Science
(formerly Project MAC) and at the Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
This work was supported, in part, by the United States Energy
Research and Development Administration under Contract Number E(11-1)-3070
and by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration under Grant NSG 1323.
Support for the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory's
artificial intelligence research
is provided in part by the Advanced Research Projects Agency
of the Department of Defense under Office of Naval Research contract
N00014-75-C-0643.
.sp 2
.nofill
*__NSF Fellow
.he1
1Guy L. Steele Jr.
.he2
1Data Representations in PDP-10 MacLISP

.spage
.php1
.page

.adjust
.section
Introduction
.sp
	MacLISP is a version of LISP which is used not only
as a user application language but as a systems programming
language, supporting such systems as MACSYMA and CONNIVER.
As such, it has been carefully designed with speed
as one of its major goals.  Generality, ease of use, and
debuggability have not been neglected, but speed of
compiled code has been the primary consideration.
This is a departure from the traditional view of LISP
as a friendly and general but slow and clumsy language.
	The representations of data objects in MacLISP
have undergone a continuous evolution towards this goal.
When MacLISP was first created, the data representations
were designed for simplicity and compactness at the
expense of speed.  Since then there have been at least two
major revisions, each to speed up compiled code
and simplify the processing of the data.
Here we discuss the current implementation on the PDP-10
(MacLISP also runs on Multics, and on the "LISP machines"
being constructed at the MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory).
We shall contrast it with previous MacLISP implementations and
implementations of other LISP systems, and discuss some
of the design decisions involved.

.sp 2
.section
Organization of the PDP-10
.sp
	The data representations in MacLISP have been carefully
designed to take full advantage of the PDP-10 architecture.
A full understanding of the design decisions involved requires
the following minimal knowledge of the PDP-10 instruction set.
	The PDP-10 operates on 36-bit words.  Memory addresses
designate words, not bytes, and are 18 bits wide; thus two addresses can fit in one word.
There is a class of instructions which manipulate half-words;
for example, one can store into half of a memory word and
either not affect the other half or set the other half to
all zeros or all ones.
	The PDP-10 has 16 accumulators, each 36 bits wide.
All but one can be used for indexing; all can be used as stack
pointers; all can be used for arithmetic.  The accumulators
can also be referenced as the first 16 memory locations
(though they are hardware registers and not actually memory locations).
For reasons explained later, MacLISP devotes certain accumulators
to specific purposes.  Accumulator 0 contains the atom NIL.
Accumulators 1-5 may contain pointers to data objects;
these are used to pass arguments to LISP functions
and return values from them.
Accumulators 6-10 are scratch registers, and are generally used
for arithmetic.  Accumulator 11 is reserved for a future purpose.
Accumulators 12-15 are used for stack pointers to the four stacks.
	Every user PDP-10 instruction has the following format:
.sp
.block 3
.nofill
	-------------------------------------------------
	|   opcode   | ac |@|idx|       address         |
	-------------------------------------------------
.adjust
.sp
Each instruction has a 9-bit operation code and a 4-bit field
specifying an accumulator.  The effective memory address (or immediate
operand) is uniformly computed by adding to the 18-bit address
field the contents of the accumulator specified by the 4-bit
index field (a zero index field means no indexing).
If the indirection bit "@" is set, then a word is fetched
using the computed address and the process iterated on
the address, index, and @ fields of the fetched word.
In this way the PDP-10 allows multiple levels of indirection
with indexing at each step.

.sp 2
.section
MacLISP Data Types
.sp
	MacLISP currently provides the user with the following
types of data objects:
.sp
.adjust
.in 10
.un 10
FIXNUM____Single-precision integers.
.un 10
FLONUM____Single-precision floating-point numbers.
.un 10
BIGNUM____Integers of arbitrary precision.  The size of an integer
arithmetic result is limited only by the amount of storage available.
.un 10
SYMBOL____Atomic symbols, which are used in LISP as identifiers
but which are also manipulable data objects.  Symbols have
value cells, which can contain LISP objects, and property lists,
which are lists used to store information which can be accessed
quickly given the atom.  Symbols are written as strings of letters,
digits, and other non-special characters.  The special symbol NIL
is used to terminate lists and to denote the logical value FALSE.
.un 10
LIST______The traditional CONS cell, which has a CAR and a CDR
which are each LISP objects.  A chain of such cells strung
together by their CDR fields is called a list; the CAR fields
contain the elements of the list.  The special symbol NIL
is in the CDR of the last cell.  A chain of list cells
is written by writing the CAR elements, enclosed in parentheses.
A non-NIL non-list CDR field is written preceded by a dot.
An example of a list is (ONE TWO THREE), which has three
elements which are all symbols.  It is made up of three list cells thus:
.sp
.block 5
.nofill
[list cell 1]------>[list cell 2]------>[list cell 3]------>NIL
     |        cdr        |        cdr        |        cdr
car  |		     car |		 car |
     V                   V                   V
    ONE			TWO		   THREE
.adjust
.sp
.un 10
ARRAY_____Arrays of one to five dimensions, dynamically allocatable.
.un 10
HUNK______Short vectors, similar to LIST cells except that they
have more than two components.  This data type is fairly new and
is still experimental.
.in 0

.sp 2
.section
Pointers
.sp
	In MacLISP, as in most LISP systems, the unit of
data is the pointer.  A pointer is typically represented
as a memory address, with the components of the data object pointed to
in the memory at that address.  The reason for this is that
LISP data objects have varying sizes, and it is desirable
to manipulate them in a uniform manner.  Numbers, for example,
may occupy varying numbers of words, and it is not always feasible
to put one as such into the accumulators.
A pointer, being only 18 bits, can always fit in one accumulator
regardless of the size of the object pointed to; moreover, it
requires only 18 bits for one data object to contain another,
since it need actually only contain a pointer to the other.
	Given a pointer, it is necessary to be able to
determine what kind of object is being pointed to.
There are two alternatives:  one can either have a field in
every data object specifying what type of object it is,
or encode the type information in the pointer to the object.
The latter method entails an additional choice:
one can either adjoin type information to the memory address
(in which case it takes more bits to represent a pointer),
or arrange it so that the type is implied by the memory address
itself (in which case the memory must be partitioned
into different areas reserved for the various data types).
MacLISP has generally used this last solution,  primarily
because of the half-word manipulation facilities of the PDP-10.
Two memory address will fit in one word with no extra bits
left over.  (Contrast this with an IBM 370, which has 32-bit
words and 24-bit addresses; on this machine one would use
32-bit pointers, encoding type information in the extra eight bits.)
This is extremely useful because a list cell will fit in one word;
the left half can contain a pointer to the CAR and the right half
a pointer to the CDR.
	The method MacLISP presently uses for determining the
type of a data object involves using a data type table.
The 18-bit address space (256K words) of the PDP-10 is divided
into segments of 512 words.  All objects in the same segment
are of the same data type.  To find the data type of an object
given its address, one takes the nine high-order bits of the
address and uses them to index the data type table
(called ST, for Segment Table).  This table entry contains an
encoding of the data type for objects in the corresponding segment:
.sp
.nofill
	Bit 0	   0 if atomic, 1 otherwise.
	Bit 1	   1 if list cells.
	Bit 2	   1 if fixnums.
	Bit 3	   1 if flonums.
	Bit 4	   1 if bignums.
	Bit 5	   1 if symbols.
	Bit 6	   1 if arrays (actually, array pointers; see below).
	Bit 7	   1 if value cells for symbols.
	Bit 8	   1 if number stack (one of bits 2-3 should also be set).
	Bit 9	   is currently unused.
	Bit 10	   1 if memory exists, but is not used for data.
	Bit 11	   1 if memory does not exist.
	Bit 12	   1 if memory is pure (read-only).
	Bit 13	   1 if hunks.
	Bits 14-17 are currently unused.
.block 4
	Bits 18-35 (the right half) contain a pointer to the symbol
		   representing the data type, namely one of LIST,
		   FIXNUM, etc.  The symbol RANDOM is used for segments
		   containing no standard MacLISP data objects.
.adjust
.sp
The encoding is redundant to take advantage of the PDP-10 instruction
set and to optimize certain common operations.
There is an instruction which can test selected bits in a half-word
of an accumulator and skip if any are set.  Thus, one can test
for a number by testing bits 2, 3, and 4 together.
Bit 0 (the sign bit) is 1 for list, hunk, and value cell segments
(non-atoms) and 0 for all others (atoms).  This saves an instruction
when making the very common test for atom-ness, since one can
use the skip-on-memory-sign instruction instead of having
to fetch the table entry into an accumulator.
The right half of a table entry contains a pointer to the symbol
which the MacLISP function TYPEP is supposed to return for objects
of that type.  Thus, the TYPEP function need only extract the
right half of a table entry; it does not have to test all the bits
individually.  Finally, the system arranges for all the symbols
to which a table entry can point to be in consecutive memory
locations in one symbol segment.  Since these symbols have
consecutive memory address, the right half of a table entry
can be used to index dispatch tables by type.  For example,
the EQUAL function, which determines whether two LISP objects
are isomorphic, first compares the data types of its two arguments;
if the data types match, then it does an indexed jump, indexed
by the right half of a Segment Table entry, to determine how
to compare the two objects.
	By way of contrast, let us briefly consider the
storage convention formerly used by MacLISP.
Memory was partitioned into several contiguous regions,
not all of the same size.  The lowest and highest addresses
of each region were known (usually the low
address of one region was one more than the highest address
of the region below it).  To determine the data type
of a pointer it was necessary to compare the address to
the addresses of all the boundaries of the regions.
This was somewhat faster than the current table method
if only one or two comparisons were needed (as in determining
whether a pointer pointed to a number, since the number regions
were contiguous), but slower in the general case; furthermore,
there was no convenient way to dispatch on the data type.
On the other hand, the table method requires space for the entire 512-word
table, even if only a small number of segments are in use.
(There is another 512-word table for use by the garbage collector,
the GC Segment Table (GCST), which doubles this penalty.)
The deciding advantage of the table method is that it permits
dynamic expansion of the storage used for each kind of data.
The region method requires all list cells, for example, to be in a contiguous
region; once this region is fixed, there is no easy way to expand it.
Under the table method, any currently unused segment can be pressed
into service for list cells merely by changing its table
entry.  An additional bonus of the table scheme is that the space
required for the instructions to do a type-check is small,
and so it is often worth-while to compile such type-checks in-line
in compiled code rather than calling a type-checking subroutine.
	In practice new data segments are not allocated
randomly, but from the top of memory down.  As new pages of memory
are needed they are acquired from the time-sharing system
and used for segments (on the ITS system, there are two segments per page).
Compiled programs are loaded starting in low memory and working up;
thus between the highest program loaded and the lowest data segment
allocated there is a big hole in memory, which is eaten away from both
ends as required.  This hole has been whimsically named "the BIg Bag
Of Pages" from which new ones are drawn as needed; hence the name
"BIBOP" for the scheme.  (The TOPS-10 timesharing system provided by DEC
does not allow memory to be grown from the top down, but only from
the bottom up.  When running under this time-sharing system MacLISP
has a fixed region for loading programs, and allocates new data segments
from the bottom up.)

.sp 2
.section
Data Representations
.sp
	List cells, as mentioned above, are represented as single
words.  The CAR pointer is in the left half of the word,
and the CDR pointer in the right half.
	Fixnums are represented as single words which contain
the PDP-10 representation of the number.  As explained more fully
in [Steele], this representation permits arithmetic to be performed
easily.  If a pointer to a fixnum is in an accumulator, then any
arithmetic instruction can access the value by indexing off
that accumulator with a zero base address.
	Flonums are represented as single words
in a manner similar to fixnums.
	Bignums each have a single word in a bignum segment.
The left half of this word is all zeros or all ones, representing
the sign of the number.  This representation of the sign is
compatible with that for fixnums and flonums; thus the sign
of any number can be tested with the test-sign-of-memory
instruction.  (Bignums were formerly represented as list
cells with special pointers in the CAR; this did not permit
the compatibility of sign bits, and made it difficult
to test for either numbers or lists.)
The right half points to a list of positive fixnums,
which represent the magnitude of the bignum, 35 bits per fixnum,
least significant bits first in the list.
A list is used instead of a contiguous block of storage for
both ease of allocation and generality of use.  The least
significant bits come first in the list to ease the addition
algorithm.
	Symbols are quite complex objects.  Each symbol has
one word in a symbol segment and two words in another segment.
The right half of the one word points to the symbol's property list,
which is an ordinary list; the left half points to the two-word
block.  These two words in turn are laid out so:
.sp
.block 5
.nofill
	-------------------------------------------------
	|      bits        |  0  |pointer to value cell |
	-------------------------------------------------
	|     "args" property    |pointer to print name |
	-------------------------------------------------
.adjust
.sp
The "bits" have various specialized purposes.
The value cell for the symbol is in a value cell segment.
Notice that bits 13-17 of the first word are zero,
specifying no indexing or indirection.  This permits
an instruction to indirect through this word to get the
value of the symbol.  Getting the address of the two-word block
also takes an instruction; thus one can get the value of a symbol
in two instructions.  The "args" property is used by the MacLISP
interpreter for checking the number of arguments to a function
(for symbols are also used to denote the names of functions).
The print name is a list of fixnums containing the characters
of the symbol's name, packed five ascii characters to the word.
	The special symbol NIL is not represented in this manner.
The address of NIL is zero.  This allows a particularly fast check
for NIL; one can use the jump-if-zero instruction.
This is why accumulator 0 (which is also memory location 0)
is reserved for NIL.  Accumulator 0 normally contains zero itself;
in this way taking CAR or CDR of NIL yields NIL.
This allows one to follow a list by CDR pointers to a predetermined
depth and not have to check at each step whether one has run off the end.
(This trick was borrowed from InterLISP. [Teitelman])
Most functions make special checks for NIL anyway, so this
non-standard representation is not harmful.
PRINT, for example, just checks for NIL specially and just outputs
"NIL" without looking for a print name.
NIL does have a property list, but it is not stored where it is
in other symbols; the property list functions must check for NIL
(which takes only one instruction anyway).  NIL has no value cell,
and always evaluates to NIL.
	One might wonder why normal symbols are divided up
into two parts, and why the value cell is not simply part of the
two-word block.  The answer is that once constructed the two-word
block normally does not change, and so may be placed in read-only
memory and shared between processes.  If several MACSYMA processes
are in use, this sharing may ease core requirements by tens of thousands
of words.
	To save even more memory, symbols are not provided with
value cells until necessary (most symbols are never actually given
values).  Instead, they are made to point to a "standard unbound"
value cell, which is read-only and contains the marker specifying
that no value is present.  When an attempt is made to write into
this value cell, the write is intercepted and a new value cell created
for the symbol in question.
	(Besides making parts of symbols read-only, MacLISP currently
allows for read-only list cells, fixnums, flonums, and bignums.
These are useful for constructing constant data objects which are
referred to by compiled code but never modified, and for properties
on property lists whose values are not expected to change (such as
function definitions).  In certain cases, such as the property-list
modifying routines, checks are made for read-only objects, and such
objects are copied into writable memory if necessary to carry
out the operation.  This copying causes the old read-only copy to
be wasted from then on, but this is acceptable as such copying
is seldom necessary in practice.  This strategy may be contrasted to the
approach of InterLISP [Teitelman], in which an entire page of memory
is made writable if an attempt is made to modify any object on that page.
This approach is more general than that of MacLISP, but in practice
tends to reduce the sharing of pages among processes, increasing the load
on the time-sharing system.)
	Value cells, though not properly a MacLISP data type, are
worthy of discussion.  They are single words, containing a pointer
in the right half and zero in the left half.  This apparent waste
of 18 bits is motivated by speed considerations.  Compiled code
often references the value cells of global variables.
Since the left half of a value cell is zero, a test for NIL
can be done with a single skip-if-memory-zero instruction;
this is useful for switches.
Furthermore, if a value cell is known to contain a list,
the CAR or CDR can be taken in one instruction,
using a half-word instruction with indirect addressing,
because the index and indirection fields are zero,
without having to fetch the value into an accumulator first.
Similarly, if a value cell contains a number, the sign can
be tested and the value (except for bignums) accessed
by using indirect addressing.  (It should be noted that
compiled code does not keep local variable values in value cells,
but uses even more clever techniques involving stacks.)
	Arrays have a complicated representation because they can
be of arbitrary size, and must be allocated as a contiguous block
for efficient indexing.  The solution chosen is to split it into two
parts: a Special ARray cell (called SAR, not SAC, for some reason)
in an array segment, and the
block of data.  The data itself is kept just below the hole in memory,
floating above loaded programs.  When new programs are loaded,
the array data is shuffled upward in memory, and the special array
pointers are updated.  Similarly, when allocating a new array or
reclaiming an old one it may be necessary to shuffle the array data.
	The special array pointer is two words:
.sp
.block 17
.nofill
                 ---------------------------------------------------
		 |						   |
special array	 |			-------------------------  |
  pointer (SAR)	 V			| for garbage collector |  |
	-------------------		-------------------------  |
	| bits |0|    *---+------------>| code for array access |  |
	-------------------		-------------------------  |
	| bits |7|    *---+------	| pointer back to SAR *-+---
	-------------------     |	-------------------------
				|	|       dimension       |
				|	|      information      |
				|	-------------------------
				------->|                       |
					|         array 	|
					|	  data		|
					|			|
					-------------------------
.adjust
.sp
A complete discussion of the SAR contents and array access methods
is beyond the scope of this paper.  Notice, however, that the
indirection and index fields are chosen to be 0 and 7 for the two
SAR words.  The first admits an indirection for calling the array
as if it were a function, according to MacLISP convention;
the second allows indexing off accumulator 7 for accessing the data
from compiled code.  See [Steele] for a fuller treatment of this.
	Hunks are like list cells, but consist of several
contiguous words.  They are always a power of two in size,
for convenience of allocation.  Hunks of sizes other than powers of two
are created by allocating a hunk of a size just big enough,
and then marking some of the halfwords as being unused
by filling them with a -1 pointer (actually 777777).  This was chosen because it never
points to a data object, and because it is easily generated with
instructions that set half- or full-words to all ones.
It is time-consuming to determine the actual size of a hunk,
since one must count the number of unused halfwords, but then
hunks were created as an experimental space-saving representation
with properties somewhere between those of lists and arrays.

.sp 2
.section
Garbage Collection
.sp
	Every so often there comes a point when all the space
currently existing for data objects has been allocated.
At this point there are two alternatives:
.br
[1] allocate a new segment for data objects of the type needed.
.br
[2] attempt to reclaim space used by data objects which are no longer
needed (by the process of garbage collection).
.br
A study by Conrad indicates that the best strategy is to do [2] only
if [1] fails because one's address space (256K words, in this case)
is completely allocated, PROVIDED that one has the facility to
compact one's data storage and de-allocate segments.  [Conrad]
Since MacLISP currently hasn't the ability to de-allocate segments
("once a fixnum, always a fixnum"), this strategy must be modified.
One must be cautious about allocating a new segment, since
the allocation cannot be undone; thus MacLISP tries garbage collection first
unless explicitly told otherwise by the programmer, and then allocates
a new segment if garbage collection fails to reclaim enough space
for the required data type.
	Suppose, for example, that it is necessary to allocate a new list cell.
The CONS function checks the freelist for the data type "list cell";
if the freelist is not empty, then the first cell on that list is used.
(There is a freelist for each data type, which consists of all the
currently unused objects in all the segments for that data type,
strung together such that each object points to the next.
This can be done even for objects which ordinarily do not contain
pointers, such as fixnums and flonums, since those objects are large
enough to contain at least a single pointer.
There is a set of fixed locations, one for each data type, which
contain pointers to the first cells on the respective freelists.)
	If, in our example, the list cell freelist is empty,
then the garbage collector is invoked.
Controlled by user-settable parameters, the garbage collector may
decide simply to allocate a new list segment (which involves
getting a new memory page from the time-sharing system,
altering the Segment Table, and adding the newly allocated objects
to the freelist).  If it decides not to do this, or if the attempt
fails for any reason, then the actual garbage collection process
is undertaken.  This involves finding all the data objects
which are accessible to the user program.  An object is accessible
if it is pointed to by compiled code, if pointed to by a global
variable or internal pointer register (such as accumulators 1-5),
or if pointed to by another accessible object.  Notice that
this definition is recursive, and so requires a recursive searching
of all the data objects to determine which are accessible.
This searching is known as the mark phase of the garbage collector.
	Associated with each data object is a "mark bit" for use by the garbage
collector.  As the garbage collector locates each accessible object,
it sets that object's mark bit.  For list cells, fixnums, flonums,
bignums, and hunks, these bits are stored in a part of memory unrelated
to the memory occupied by the data objects themselves.
For each 512-word segment there is a "bit block" of 16 words, each holding
32 mark bits.  The location of the bit block is found by using the
top 9 bits of the address of the data object to index the GC Segment Table.
(Bit blocks themselves are allocated in special "bit block" segments;
thus bit blocks are treated internally as yet another data type.
Occasionally the obscure error message "GLEEP - OUT OF BIT BLOCKS"
is printed by LISP in the highly infrequent situation where it cannot
allocate a new bit block after allocating a new segment which needs a bit block.)
No bit blocks are needed for symbols and special array pointers.
Recall that the left half of a symbol word points to a two-word block.
Since such a two-word block is always at an even address, the low
bit of the pointer to it is normally zero.  This bit is used during
garbage collection as the mark bit for that symbol.
Special array pointers have room in them for a variety of bits, and one of them
is used as a mark bit.  Value cells are only reclaimed when the symbol
pointing to them is reclaimed (and not even then, if compiled code
points to the value cell, which fact is indicated by a bit in the two-word
symbol block pointing to the value cell), and so they require no mark bits.
	To aid the garbage collector in the mark phase, the GCST
contains some bits which also encode the data type redundantly,
in a form useful to the marking routine.  The bits indicate whether
the object must be marked, and if so the method of marking;
they also indicate how many pointers to other objects are
contained in the object now being marked.
	After recursively locating and marking all accessible cells,
the garbage collector then performs a sweep phase, in which every data
object is examined, and those which have not been marked are added to
the appropriate freelist.  To aid the sweep phase, each GCST entry has a
field by which all entries for segments of the same data type are linked together
in a list.  In this way the garbage collector does not need to scan
the entire segment table looking for entries for each type.
For each segment, the garbage collector examines each data object
in the segment and its mark bit, and adds the object to the appropriate freelist
if the mark bit is not set.  For symbols and arrays it also resets the
mark bit at this time.  (Bit blocks are reset at the beginning
of the mark phase.)
	If, in our example, the garbage collection process has not reclaimed
enough list cells (as determined by another programmer-specified parameter),
then it will try to allocate one or more new list cell segments.
If, however, this causes the total number of list cells to exceed yet another
programmer-specified parameter, then a "user interrupt" is signaled,
and a function written by the programmer steps in.  In MACSYMA, this
function is the one that typically informs you:
.sp
.nofill
	YOU HAVE RUN OUT OF LIST SPACE.
	DO YOU WANT MORE?
	TYPE ALL; NONE; A LEVEL-NO. OR THE NAME OF A SPACE.
.adjust
.sp
The reason for all these parameters is the necessary caution described above;
if all the available segments get allocated as list cell segments
(which can easily happen due to intermediate expression swell, for example),
then they cannot be used for anything else, including compiled code.
This is why, in MACSYMA, if you use up too much list space, you can't load
up DEFINT thereafter!
	Array data (as opposed to the SAR objects) is handled by a special
routine that knows how to shuffle them up and down in core as necessary.
When a new array is allocated, the garbage collector has the same
decision to make as to whether to allocate more memory or attempt
to reclaim unused arrays.  The decision here is less critical,
since memory allocated for arrays CAN be de-allocated, and so no
programmer-specified parameters are used.  Array data only goes away
when the corresponding SAR is reclaimed by the normal garbage collection
process (or when the array is explicitly killed by the user, using the
*REARRAY function).
	For the interested reader, the format of a GCST entry is shown here:
.sp
.nofill
	Bit 0	   1 if data objects in this segment must be marked.
	Bit 1	   1 if this segment contains value cells.
	Bit 2	   1 if symbols.
	Bit 3	   1 if special array pointers.
	Bit 4	   1 if the right half of this data object contains a
		   pointer (true of list, bignum, and hunk data objects).
	Bit 5	   1 if the left half of this data object contains a
		   pointer (true of list and hunk objects -- note that
		   symbols and special array pointers get special treatment).
		   It is always true that bit 4 is set if this one is.
	Bit 6	   1 if hunks (in this case, the ST entry is used to
		   determine the size of the hunk).
	Bits 7-12  are unused.
	Bits 13-21 contain the index into GCST of the next entry with the
		   same data type, or zero if this is the last such entry.
		   (Segment 0 never contains data objects, except NIL,
		   which is treated specially anyway.)
	Bits 22-35 contain the high 14 bits of the address of the bit
		   block for this segment, if any.
.adjust
.sp
Since bit blocks are 16 words long, the low four bits of the address
of such a bit block are always zero.  Thus the GCST entry only needs
to contain the high 14 bits of the address.  These 14 bits
are right-adjusted in the GCST entry for the convenience
of a clever, tightly-coded marking algorithm.  This algorithm
works roughly as follows:
.br
[a] Shift the address of the data object to be marked right by 9 bits,
putting the low 9 bits into the next accumulator.
.br
[b] Use the high 9 address bits to fetch a GCST entry into the accumulator
holding the high 9 address bits, skipping on the sign bit (whether to mark or not).
.br
[c] Test bits 1, 2, 3 (special treatment), skipping if none are set.
.br
[d] Shift the two accumulators left by 4 bits.
This brings four of the low 9 address bits back into the first accumulator,
which together with 14 bits from the GCST entry yield the address
of a word in the bit block.  The 5 bits remaining in the second accumulator
indicate the bit within the word to use as the mark bit.
Finally, bit 4 is brought into the sign bit of the first accumulator.
.br
[e] Rotate the second accumulator, bringing the 5 bits to the low end.
.br
[f] Indexing off the first accumulator, fetch the word of mark bits.
.br
[g] Set a mark bit in the word, skipping if it was not already marked.
(If this doesn't skip, then we exit the marking algorithm.
It is not necessary to store back the word of mark bits.)
The bit is selected by indexing off the second accumulator into a table
of words, each with one bit set.
.br
[h] Store back the word of mark bits.
.br
[i] Test the sign bit of the first accumulator (bit 4 of the GCST entry),
jumping to the exit if not set.
.br
[j] If bit 1 is set (bit 5 of the GCST entry), recursively mark the pointer
in the left half.  If bit 2 is set (bit 6 of the GCST entry),
mark all the pointers in the hunk.
.br
[k] Iteratively mark the pointer in the right half.
	I have taken the trouble to outline these steps carefully
because most of them are single PDP-10 instructions, carefully
designed to perform two or three useful operations simultaneously.
The point is that the careful design of tables and the use of
redundant encoding can greatly increase the speed of critical
inner loops.  (It should also be mentioned that such careful
thought about design is usually warranted only for critical
inner loops!)  I should also mention that most of the constants
which have been mentioned in this paper (bit numbers,
sizes of segments, and so on) are represented symbolically
in the text of the MacLISP code; one can change the size of
a segment by changing a single definition, and the sizes
of fields in GCST entries, positions of bits, and so on
will be adjusted by assembly-time computations.
I have used numbers in this paper only for concreteness.
	For certain spaces the mark bits are actually used
in the inverted sense: 1 means not marked, and 0 means marked.
This allows the sweep loop to test for an entire block of 32. words
all being marked by testing for a zero word of mark bits;
the loop can then just skip over the block, and avoid testing
the individual bits.  The test for a zero word is done while moving
the word into an accumulator, which has to be done anyway,
and so is essentially free.

.sp 2
.section
The Address Space Problem
.sp
	One of the difficulties currently facing MacLISP is the "limited"
address space provided by the PDP-10.  The architecture of the machine
inherently limits addresses to 18 bits; hence a single program cannot
address more than 256K words of memory.  Combined with the fact that
MacLISP does not presently allow for de-allocation of data segments
(or of loaded compiled code, for that matter), this severely
limits the use of memory.  Some MACSYMA problems, for example,
would require much more than 256K of programs and list data to solve;
others require less than 256K at any one time, but cannot be run
because of the de-allocation difficulty.
	It is fairly clear that completely solving the de-allocation
problem would be more trouble than it is worth, and would not
stave off the fundamental difficulty indefinitely.
As both MACSYMA problems and MACSYMA itself grow in size,
we will feel more and more the "address space crunch".
The only general way to solve this problem is to arrange for
a bigger address space.
	There are three solutions which are presently at all realistic.
Two involve continued use of the PDP-10 architecture, but modified
in several ways to allow programs to access more memory.
These modifications may or may not be made available by DEC,
and may or may not be retrofittable to the MACSYMA Consortium KL10 processor.
The difference between the two schemes involves the decision as to whether
MacLISP data pointers should still fit into 18 bits.  If not,
there is immediately a factor-of-two memory penalty, since list cells
must be two words instead of one.  However, there are also some technical
advantages to such an arrangement, as well as the obvious advantage
that list space can become bigger than 256K.
If pointers are kept to 18 bits, then all LISP data must fit in 256K,
but any amount of compiled code and any number of arrays could be loaded.
Both of these schemes have been worked out on paper to a great extent
by Guy L. Steele Jr. and Jon L. White, to compare their merits and to
prepare for the possibility that one of them may be needed.
Either scheme would require a good deal of work (at least one to two man-years)
to implement fully in both the interpreter and the compiler.
	The third solution involves moving to another machine architecture
altogether.  This leaves open the choice of machine.  Few commercially
available machines are as conducive to the support of LISP as the PDP-10,
and it probably would not be practical to undertake a completely new
implementation.  MacLISP does presently run on Multics (on a Honeywell 6180
processor), but is rather slow, and the Multics system is expensize and not
widely available.  The best bet in this direction seems to be the LISP machine,
designed by Richard Greenblatt, Tom Knight, et al. at the MIT Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory.  The prototype machine has been working for a number
of months now, and the basic software is beginning to show signs of life.
It is not inconceivable that MACSYMA may be run experimentally
on it by summer 1977.  The LISP machine has a 24-bit address space,
and makes more efficient use of its memory than even the PDP-10.
However, although it is much less expensive than a KL10, it is not designed
for time-sharing.
	The PDP-10 implementation of MacLISP and of MACSYMA will certainly
be useful for at least the next five to ten years.  After that, only
time can tell.

.sp 2
.section
Summary
.sp
	MacLISP is designed to be an efficient, high-level
systems programming language, rather than primarily an
applications programming language.  Its internal organization
is a carefully chosen balance between useful generality
and special-case efficiency tricks.  A thoughtful choice of
data and table representations can exploit the architecture
of the host machine to gain speed in critical places without
great loss of generality.  The use of symbolic assembly parameters
can avoid tying the system to a single rigid format.
The greatest effort has been expended on speeding up type-checking,
access to values in global variables, and garbage collection,
since these are among the most frequent of LISP operations.
The address space crunch may eventually force yet another redesign
if the PDP-10 architecture is retained.


.block 12
.sp 2
.section
References
.sp
.in 13
.un 13
[Steele]_____Steele, Guy L. Jr.
"Fast Arithmetic in MacLISP."
Proceedings of the MACSYMA Users' Conference,
NASA CP-2012, 1977.  Also MIT AI Memo 421 (Cambridge, August 1977).
.sp
.un 13
[Teitelman]__Teitelman, Warren.
InterLISP Reference Manual.
Revised edition.  Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (Palo Alto, 1975).
.sp
.un 13
[Conrad]_____Conrad, William R.
A compactifying garbage collector for ECL's non-homogeneous heap.
Technical Report 2-74.
Center for Research in Computing Technology, Harvard U. (Cambridge, February 1974).
.in 0