.xgp
.squish
.adjust
.c << text font >>
.font 0 25fr3
.c << smaller font for headings >>
.font 1 22fg
.font 2 30vrb
.font 3 40vr
.c << text is 6.25 inches wide >>
.quote 
.dummy _
.sterm |
.twinch 6.25
.sidm 50
.tl 55
.topm 60
.c << want to flush losing multiple cr's >>
.crcomp
.c << want to have at least 3 lines of a section on a page >>
.sblock 5
.spw 16


.center
2MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
.center
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE LABORATORY
.sp 3
.spread
/0AI Memo 421//September 1977/
.sp 3
.center
2FAST ARITHMETIC IN MACLISP
.sp
.center
0by
.sp
.center
__Guy Lewis Steele Jr. *
.sp 2
Abstract:
.adjust
	MacLISP provides a compiler which produces numerical
code competitive in speed with some FORTRAN implementations
and yet compatible with the rest of the MacLISP system.
All numerical programs can be run under the MacLISP interpreter.
Additional declarations to the compiler specify type information
which allows the generation of optimized numerical code
which generally does not require the garbage collection of
temporary numerical results.  Array accesses are almost as fast
as in FORTRAN, and permit the use of dynamically allocated arrays
of varying dimensions.  Here we discuss the implementation
decisions regarding user interface, data representations,
and interfacing conventions which allow the generation of fast numerical LISP code.
.sp 3
This paper was presented at the MACSYMA Users Conference,
Berkeley, California, July 1977.
.sp 2
.in 6
.un 6
Keywords: numerical code, optimization, compilers,
data representations, dynamic allocation, LISP, MacLISP, FORTRAN
.in 0
.sp 6
This report describes research done at the Laboratory for Computer Science
(formerly Project MAC) and at the Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
This work was supported, in part, by the United States Energy
Research and Development Administration under Contract Number E(11-1)-3070
and by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration under Grant NSG 1323.
Support for the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory's artificial intelligence research
is provided in part by the Advanced Research Projects Agency
of the Department of Defense under Office of Naval Research contract
N00014-75-C-0643.
.sp 2
.nofill
*__NSF Fellow
.he1
1Guy L. Steele Jr.
.he2
1Fast Arithmetic in MacLISP

.spage
.php1
.page

.adjust

.section
Introduction
.sp
	For several years now MacLISP has supported a compiler
which produces extremely good numerical code.
Measurements made by Fateman indicate that the generated code
is competitive with FORTRAN.  [Fateman]
Expressing such numerical code does not require the use of
special numerical language embedded within LISP, in the manner that
some higher-level languages allow the user to write machine
code in the middle of a program.
Rather, all numerical programs are completely compatible with the
MacLISP interpreter.  The compiler processes the interpreter
definitions along with additional numerical declarations.
These declarations are not required; omitting them merely results
in slower compiled code.
For convenience, special numeric functions are provided which
carry implicit declared type information (such as + and +$
for integer and floating point addition, as opposed to PLUS),
but the user need not use them to get optimized numerical code.


.sp 2
.section
Changes to the MacLISP Language
.sp
	The primary change to the MacLISP language, as seen by the user,
was the creation of numerical declarations for use by the compiler.
A general compiler declaration mechanism was already a part of the
language, so adding the numerical declarations was not difficult.
This mechanism involves writing a MacLISP expression beginning
with the word DECLARE and followed by various declarations.
Declarations may be global or local.  Global declarations are
written by themselves in a file, and affect all following functions;
local declarations are written within the text of a MacLISP function,
and affect only the scope of the construct they are written within.
	The simplest new declarations are statements of the types of variables.
Recall that MacLISP has three basic numeric types: fixnum, flonum, and
bignum.  These are (respectively) single-precision integers,
single-precision floating-point numbers, and arbitrary-precision
integers.  Only the first two types can be operated on directly by hardware
instructions, and so they are the only types of interest to the compiler.
An example of a variable declaration: 
.sp
.nofill
	(DECLARE (FIXNUM I J K)		;single-precision integers
		 (FLONUM A B FOO ZAP)	;single-precision reals
		 (NOTYPE SNURF QUUX))	;no specific type
.adjust
.sp
If a variable is always numeric but sometimes may hold bignums,
it must be declared NOTYPE.
The default assumption is that a variable is NOTYPE (that is,
may contain any MacLISP data object); NOTYPE declarations
are primarily useful to undo previous numeric declarations.
	The types of the arguments and returned values of functions
may be similarly declared:
.sp
.nofill
	(DECLARE (FLONUM (CUBE-ROOT FLONUM)
			 (INTEGER-POWER-OF-REAL FLONUM FIXNUM))
		 (FIXNUM (FIBONACCI FIXNUM)
			 (LENGTH-OF-LIST NOTYPE))
		 (NOTYPE (BETWEEN-ZERO-AND-ONE-PREDICATE FLONUM)))
.adjust
.sp
This declaration specifies that CUBE-ROOT takes a FLONUM argument
and delivers a FLONUM result, that INTEGER-POWER-OF-REAL takes
a FLONUM and a FIXNUM and delivers a FLONUM, and so on.
The types of the arguments could also be specified by using a local
declaration:
.sp
.nofill
	(DECLARE (FLONUM (CUBE-ROOT)))	;global declaration
.sp
	(DEFUN CUBE-ROOT (X)
	       (DECLARE (FLONUM X))	;local declaration
	       (EXPT X .333333333))
.adjust
.sp
The result type must be specified by a global declaration, however,
and declaring the argument types globally also can help the
compiler to produce better code for functions which call
the declared function.
	Arrays may also be declared globally to the compiler.
MacLISP arrays come in three types, which are essentially
FIXNUM, FLONUM, and NOTYPE.  (There are other types also,
but these do not concern us here.)
The ARRAY* declaration takes a subdeclaration specifying
the array type; the subdeclaration in turn specifies the
names of arrays and their dimensions.
An example:
.sp
.nofill
	(DECLARE (ARRAY* (FIXNUM TUPLE 1 TABLE 2)
			 (FLONUM VECTOR 1 MATRIX 2)))
.adjust
.sp
This declares TUPLE and VECTOR to be one-dimensional arrays,
and TABLE and MATRIX to be a two-dimensional arrays.  (MacLISP arrays may
have up to five dimensions.)  If the values of the dimensions
are also known ahead of time, a slightly different form may
be used:
.sp
.nofill
	(DECLARE (ARRAY* (FIXNUM (TUPLE 43) (TABLE 3 5))
			 (FLONUM (VECTOR 3) (MATRIX ? 17))))
.adjust
.sp
This declares TUPLE to be of length 43, TABLE to be 3 by 5,
and MATRIX to have 17 columns and an unknown number of rows.
Note that "?" can be used to denote an unknown dimension value;
even partial dimension information can help the compiler
to optimize array accesses.
	The user can write arithmetic code using the traditional names
PLUS, DIFFERENCE, TIMES, and QUOTIENT; these functions
work on any kinds of numbers, even bignums, and admit mixed-mode
arithmetic.  In the presence of type declarations,
the compiler may be able to deduce that the arguments are always
flonums, for example, and produce hardware instructions for
floating-point arithmetic.  The user can also use the FIXSW and FLOSW
declarations to tell the compiler that such "generic" arithmetic will
always involve only fixnums or only flonums.
	As a convenience to the user, however, several
versions of the common arithmetic functions are provided:
.sp
.nofill
	generic		fixnum only	flonum only
	PLUS		+		+$
	DIFFERENCE	-		-$
	TIMES		*		*$
	QUOTIENT	//		//$
	REMAINDER	\
	GCD		\\
	GREATERP	>		>
	LESSP		<		<
	EQUAL		=		=
	EXPT		^		^$ (fixnum exponent)
.adjust
.sp
(The division functions are written as "//" instead of "/"
because "/" is a MacLISP escape character.)
The functions in the last two columns are completely
equivalent to those in the first column, except that they
convey additional type information about their arguments
and results.  (An exception is that the fixnum-only functions
do not check for overflow, so in a situation where, for example,
100000000 and 100000000 were multiplied together, TIMES
would produce a bignum, whereas * would overflow and produce
a not-very-meaningful fixnum.  The flonum-only functions do not check for overflow
either, whereas the generic functions give an error for overflow,
and either an error or zero for underflow.)

.sp 2
.section
Changes to the MacLISP Implementation
.sp
	In order that the arithmetic machine instructions might be
used directly on MacLISP numeric data objects, it was necessary to
modify MacLISP to use a uniform representation for fixnums and flonums.
Before the fast-arithmetic scheme was implemented, MacLISP, like many
other LISP systems, used two representations for single-precision
integers.  One represented the integer as a pointer to a machine word
containing the value, in the same manner as floating-point numbers
were represented.  The other encoded the value into the pointer itself,
using pointer values which were otherwise worthless because they
pointed at code instead of data objects.  The motivation behind the
earlier dual representation was to avoid allocating storage for
small integer values, which are frequently used.
(InterLISP has for several years "open-compiled" arithmetic
functions as single machine instructions.  [Teitelman]
Unfortunately, it still has a dual representation for integers;
as a result, before adding two numbers it must call
a routine which determines at run-time the representation of each
number and converts each into a full machine word representation.
Compiled InterLISP code also calls a similar routine for floating-point
numbers, not because of multiple representations, but in order to
perform error-checking as completely as the interpreter does.
This run-time checking destroys any advantage gained by open-compiling
the arithmetic instructions.)
	The pointer encoding was removed from MacLISP for the fast-arithmetic
scheme, and all numbers are now uniformly encoded as pointers to full
machine words which contain the machine representations of the values.
In order to avoid allocating storage for frequently
used small integers, there are several hundred words of memory
containing consecutive small integer values, and small integers are created
by making a pointer to one of these standard locations, rather
than allocating a new word for each use of a small integer.
(MacLISP does not allow the words used to contain numbers to be
modified in the way InterLISP allows using the SETN primitive [Teitelman],
so there is no difficulty in sharing such words.  In fact, these
small integer locations are even shared among all the MacLISP processes in the time-sharing
system by making them read-only.)
	While arithmetic on bignums
cannot be compiled as standard arithmetic machine instructions,
their representation has been chosen to permit
sign tests to be open-compiled.  A bignum is a pointer to a word
which has the sign of the bignum in the sign bit (and in fact the
entire left half), and a pointer
to a list of fixnums (which represent the magnitude) in the right half.
Thus all numbers are pointers to words which contain the sign
of the number in the sign bit, and such functions as MINUSP
can always be compiled as single machine instructions.
	In order to preserve the uniformity of the function-calling
interface, it was decided that all arguments to functions must
be valid MacLISP data objects.  On the other hand, it is not desirable
to have to "number cons" out of free storage, with the garbage collection
overhead that implies, in order to pass numbers to functions.
The solution used was to introduce two extra pushdown lists (stacks)
called the fixnum and flonum pdls.  The storage in these pdls
appear to have fixnum or flonum data type, but they are allocated
as stacks rather than as garbage-collected heaps.
These stacks can be used to hold temporary numerical values
and the values of PROG variables which have been declared
to be numeric, but they can also be used to allocate
pseudo-data objects compatible with MacLISP's standard number
representation.  A pointer to a fixnum pdl location
is indistinguishable from an ordinary fixnum for most purposes;
it is a pointer to a full machine word containing the numeric value.
A typical code sequence resulting from compiling (FOO (+ A 5)) is:
.sp
.nofill
;assume accumulator 1 has the pointer value of A in it
	MOVE 7,(1)	;get the machine word for A into accumulator 7
	ADDI 7,5	;add 5 to the machine word
	PUSH FXP,7	;push resulting word into fixnum pdl
	MOVEI 1,(FXP)	;copy fxp pointer into argument accumulator 1
	CALL 1,FOO	;call foo
	SUB FXP,[1,,1]	;remove pushed word from fixnum pdl
.adjust
.sp
.c << illustrations? >>

To the function FOO the pointer passed in accumulator 1 has the
precise format of a MacLISP integer: a pointer to a machine word
containing the integer value.  Note that the value of the variable A
may itself have been such a "pdl number"; the MOVE instruction would
move the machine word value into accumulator 7 whether it was a pdl
number or an ordinary fixnum.
	One of the difficulties of using stack-allocated numbers
is that they have a definite lifetime; on return from the function
they are passed to, they are de-allocated and no longer exist.
By the time they are de-allocated, there must be no more pointers to that word
accessible to the user program, or else subsequent references
might see a wrong value because the pdl word was re-allocated
for some other purpose.
	To overcome this difficulty the notion of safety was developed.
A copy of a pointer is safe
if it can be guaranteed that the copy will become inaccessible
before what it points to is de-allocated if the pointer in fact
points to a pdl number.
Alternatively, a use for a pointer is safe if that use doesn't
require a safe pointer.
The fast-arithmetic compiler does some
complex analysis to determine what situations are safe.
Some standard conventions for safety:
.br
[1]__A pointer in a global (special) variable may have an indefinite
lifetime, and so putting a pointer in a global variable is unsafe.
It follows that such a variable may not contain a pointer
to a pdl number, since we cannot guarantee such a pointer to be safe.
Consequently, any pointer actually obtained from a global variable is safe.
.br
[2]__Consing a pointer into a list cell (or using RPLACA to put a pointer
into an existing list call) is similarly unsafe.
Pointers actually occurring in list structure
must therefore be guaranteed safe.
.br
[3]__It is not possible to return a pdl number as the value of a function,
because there would be no return to the code to de-allocate it.
Therefore returning a pointer from a function is unsafe,
and all pointers actually returned from functions are safe.
.br
[4]__Passing a pointer as an argument to a function is safe; therefore
pdl numbers (unsafe pointers) may be passed as arguments to functions.  All function
arguments are thus potentially unsafe.  They may be passed on down
to other called functions, but may not be returned or otherwise used
as if they were safe.
.br
[5]__Pdl numbers may be pointed to by ordinary compiled local
variables.  Such local variables may or may not have unsafe values,
depending on where the values came from.  The compiler must
guarantee that when the value of a local variable is used
either the value is safe or the use is safe.
	Suppose we wrote a function such as:
.sp
.nofill
		(DEFUN ZAP (A) (CONS A 'FOO))
.adjust
.sp
We are putting the argument A into a list cell (an unsafe use),
but the argument A is also (potentially) unsafe.
In this situation the compiled code must create a safe copy of
the unsafe pointer.
The compiled code therefore uses a routine PDLNMK
("pdl number make") which checks for a pdl number and makes a copy
by doing a number cons if necessary.  That is, if the pointer given
to PDLNMK is already safe, it is returned as is; but if it is unsafe,
a safe copy is made with the same value.
The compiled code for ZAP would look like this:
.sp
.nofill
	MOVEI 2,'FOO	;put constant "foo" in accumulator 2
	JSP T,PDLNMK	;make sure accumulator 1 has a safe pointer
	JCALL 2,CONS	;call CONS
.adjust
.sp
If A is not a pdl number, PDLNMK does nothing; but if it is,
PDLNMK replaces the pointer in accumulator 1 with a freshly
allocated fixnum with the same value as the pdl number.
In this way a safe value will be passed to the CONS function.
(The convention about function arguments being potentially unsafe
has an exception in CONS, so that CONS itself need not always
perform PDLNMK on its arguments.  The compiler knows about this
exception, and guarantees that anyone who calls CONS will provide
safe arguments.  In practice, arguments passed to CONS often can be
guaranteed safe by compile-time analysis, and it saves time
not to have CONS use PDLNMK.)
	Notice that one consequence of the use of PDLNMK
is that two numbers which are apparently EQ (i.e. the same pointer)
may not be if the compiled code has to make a copy.  For example,
consider this code:
.sp
.nofill
	(DEFUN LOSE (X)
	       (SETQ G X)
	       (EQ X G))
.adjust
.sp
The result of the EQ test could be NIL, even though the global
variable G apparently is assigned the same pointer as was passed
to LOSE as an argument.  If an unsafe pointer is passed to LOSE,
G will receive a safe copy of that value, which will not be
the same pointer, and so the EQ test will fail.
(This is another reason why MacLISP does not have a SETN
primitive; since the compiler can make copies of a number without warning,
conceivably SETN might modify one copy of a number but not the other,
with anomalous results.)
	Recall that one unsafe use of a pointer is returning it
as the value of a function.  We would like for numeric code
not to ever have to "number cons", but we cannot return a pdl number
from a function.  The solution to this dilemma is to allow
numeric-valued functions to have two entry points.
One is the standard MacLISP entry point, and is compatible
with the standard MacLISP calling sequence; calling the function there
will produce a MacLISP pointer value, which will involve a number cons
if the value is in fact numeric.
The other is a special entry point which is non-standard, and
can only be used by compiled code which knows that the called
function is numeric-valued.  Entering a numeric function there
will deliver a machine word in accumulator 7 instead of the
standard pointer in accumulator 1.
	In order to use this special calling sequence,
both the called function and the calling function must be
compiled with declarations specifying that the called
function is numeric-valued.  The compiler will then
compile the called function to have two entry points,
and the calling function to use the non-standard numeric
entry point.
	The entry points are actually implemented as two consecutive
locations at the beginning of the function.  The first is the
standard entry point; it merely pushes the address of a special
routine FIX1 (or FLOAT1, for a flonum-valued function)
onto the stack, and then falls into the non-standard entry point.
The function then always produces a machine number in accumulator 7.
If the function is called at the numeric entry point,
it will deliver its value as a machine word.
If called at the standard entry point, then on delivering
the machine word it will "return" to FIX1, which performs a "number cons"
on the machine word, producing a normal fixnum (or FLOAT1, which
produces a flonum), and then returns to the caller.
	As an example, here are two functions with appropriate declarations:
.sp
.nofill
	(DECLARE (FLONUM (DISC FLONUM FLONUM FLONUM)))
.sp
	(DEFUN DISC (A B C)
	       (-$ (*$ B B) (*$ 4.0 A C)))
.sp
	(DEFUN QUAD (A B C)
	       (PROG (D)
		     (DECLARE (FLONUM D))
		     (SETQ D (DISC A B C))
		     (COND ((MINUSP D) (RETURN (ERROR)))
			   (T (RETURN (//$ (-$ (SQRT D) B)
					   (*$ A 2.0)))))))
.adjust
.sp
The code produced would look like this:
.sp
.nofill
	DISC:	PUSH P,[FLOAT1]	;for normal entry, push address of FLOAT1
		MOVE 7,(2)	;numeric entry point; get machine word for B
		FMPR 7,7	;floating multiply B by itself
		MOVSI 10,(4.0)	;get 4.0 in accumulator 10
		FMPR 10,(1)	;floating multiply by A
		FMPR 10,(3)	;floating multiply by C
		FSBR 7,10	;floating subtract ac 10 from ac 7
		POPJ P,		;machine word result is in ac 7
.adjust
.sp
Notice that DISC does no number consing at all if called at the
numeric entry point.  It does all arithmetic in the accumulators,
and returns a machine word as its result.  The code is remarkably
compact, of the kind one ordinarily expects from a FORTRAN compiler.
.sp
.nofill
	QUAD:	PUSH P,1	;save A, B, and C on the stack
		PUSH P,2	; to preserve them across the
		PUSH P,3	; call to DISC
		NCALL 3,DISC	;call DISC with the same arguments
		PUSH FLP,7	;push the result onto flonum pdl
		JUMPGE 7,G0003	;jump if value non-negative
		MOVEI T,0
		CALL 16,ERROR	;call the ERROR routine
		JRST G0005	;go to G0005
	G0003:	MOVEI 1,(FLP)	;get a pointer into flonum pdl
		NCALL 1,SQRT	;call SQRT with that pointer
		FSBR 7,@-1(P)	;floating subtract machine value of B
		MOVE 10,@-2(P)	;fetch machine word value of A
		FSC 10,1	;multiply by 2.0 (using "floating scale")
		FDVR 7,10	;divide ac 7 by ac 10
		JSP T,FLCONS	;perform a flonum cons
	G0005:	SUB P,[3,,3]	;clean up the stacks
		SUB FLP,[1,,1]
		POPJ P,		;return pointer value in accumulator 1
.adjust
.sp
There are several points to note about QUAD:
.br
(1)__It was not declared to be numeric-valued.  As a result,
when returning a number it must do a number cons.  Moreover,
it does not have a numeric entry point.
.br
(2)__Because DISC was declared to be numeric-valued, QUAD uses
NCALL instead of CALL to invoke it; NCALL enters at the numeric
entry point.  The result of DISC is expected in accumulator 7.
Since QUAD needs to use this result to pass to SQRT, it makes
a pdl number out of this machine word.  In this way function values
can be made into pdl numbers after all -- but by the caller rather
than the called function.
.br
(3)__As an aside, the compiler makes some other neat optimizations.
It uses a JUMPGE instruction for MINUSP, because the value to be
tested is in an accumulator anyway.  It takes advantage of the
address arithmetic of the PDP-10 to fetch machine words
pointed to by pointers on the stack in one instruction.
It knows how to use several
accumulators for arithmetic, and to arrange for the result to end up
in the correct accumulator.  It expresses the multiplication by 2.0
as a "floating scale" instruction, which is faster than the
multiplication instruction if one operand is a floating-point
power of two.
	The representation of arrays in MacLISP was carefully redesigned
to allow fast access to them by compiled code, again taking advantage
of the powerful address arithmetic of the PDP-10.
There are essentially two kinds of arrays: s-expression arrays, whose
components may be any safe pointers, and numeric arrays, whose
components must be all fixnum machine words or all flonum machine words.
	The MacLISP ARRAY data type is a pointer to a double word
(the "special array pointer")
which in turn points to the array data.  The reason for this is that
the pointer must point to a fixed place (as all MacLISP pointers must),
but the actual array data may have to be shifted around by the garbage
collector to accommodate new storage requests, because arrays are not
of a uniform size.  When the garbage collector moves the array data,
it updates the the contents of the special array pointer, but the
special array pointer itself may remain in a fixed place.
	In exchange for the flexibility of dynamically allocated
arrays, however, one pays the price of always accessing
the array data indirectly through the special array pointer.
This cost is alleviated by taking advantage of addressing arithmetic.
The second word of each special array pointer points to the array data,
which is arranged linearly in row-major order; this second word
furthermore specifies indexing by accumulator 7.

.c << illustration >>
.block 20
.sp
.nofill
				GC information
special array pointer		header code		array data
				
	type bits		dimension 1
	      (7)		dimension 2
				...
				dimension n
				element 0
				element 1
.sp
				...
.sp
				element (D1*...*Dn)-1
.adjust
.sp
Compiled code can access a numeric array datum by calculating
the linear subscript value in accumulator 7 and then using
an indirect fetch through the second word of the special array pointer
for the array.  The linear subscript value is of course calculated
as
.sp
.nofill
	( ... (J1 * D2 + J2) * D3 + J3 ... ) * Dn + Jn
.adjust
.sp
where the Ni are the dimensions of the array and the Ji are the actual
subscripts.
For example, suppose that accumulator 1 contains
a pointer to a 3 by 5 by 13 fixnum array, and that accumulators 2, 3, and 4
contain fixnum subscripts for that array.  Then to fetch the
desired datum this code would be used:
.sp
.nofill
	MOVE 7,(2)	;fetch first subscript into ac 7
	IMULI 7,5	;multiply by 5 (second dimension)
	ADD 7,(3)	;add in second subscript
	IMULI 7,13	;multiply by 13 (third dimension)
	ADD 7,(4)	;add in third subscript
	MOVE 7,@1(1)	;fetch indirect through special array pointer
.adjust
.sp
If the number of dimensions of the array has been declared to the
compiler but not the values of the dimensions, the compiler arranges
to fetch the dimension values at run time.  This is easy because the
array is arranged so that negative subscript values fetch the dimension
information.  (The LISP user is not supposed to use this fact, but
only compiled code.)
The same example for a three-dimensional array of arbitrary dimensions
might look like this:
.sp
.nofill
	MOVE 10,(2)	;fetch first subscript into ac 10
	MOVNI 7,2	;put -2 into ac 7
	IMUL 10,@1(1)	;multiply by second dimension
	ADD 7,(3)	;add in second subscript
	MOVNI 7,1	;put -1 into ac 7
	IMUL 10,@1(1)	;multiply by third dimension
	ADD 10,(4)	;add in third subscript
	MOVE 7,10	;move into ac 7 for subscripting
	MOVE 7,@1(1)	;fetch indirect through special array pointer
.adjust
.sp
The code is a little longer than before, but will work for any
three-dimensional array.  In general, the compiler tries
to minimize subscript computations.  If the exact dimensions
are declared, or if some of the subscripts are constant, the compiler
will do part or all of the subscript calculations at compile time.
	For s-expression arrays, the pointer data are stored
two per word, with elements having even linear subscripts in the left half
of a word and the succeeding odd subscripted elements in the right half
of the word.  The compiler must generate code to test the parity
of the linear subscript and fetch the correct half-word.
Suppose that a pointer to a one-dimensional array is in
accumulator 1, and a fixnum subscript is in accumulator 2.
Then the following code would be generated:
.sp
.nofill
	MOVE 7,(2)	;fetch subscript into ac 7
	ROT 7,-1	;divide by 2, putting remainder bit in sign
	JUMPL 7,G0006	;jump if linear subscript was odd
	HLRZ 3,@1(1)	;fetch pointer from left half
	JRST G0007	;jump to G0007
G0006:	HRRZ 3,@1(1)	;fetch pointer from right half
G0007:	...
.adjust
.sp
If the compiler can determine at compile time that the linear
subscript will always be odd or always even, it will simplify the
code and omit the JUMPL, JRST, and the unused halfword fetch.

.sp 2
.section
Summary
.sp
	MacLISP supports the compilation of numerical programs
into code comparable to that produced by a FORTRAN compiler
while maintaining complete compatibility with the rest of
the MacLISP system.  All numeric code will run in the MacLISP interpreter;
additional information may be given to the compiler in the form
of declarations to help it generate the best possible code.
If such declarations are omitted, the worst that happens is
that the code runs slower.
	Compatibility with non-numeric functions
was achieved by the judicious choice
of a uniform representation for LISP numbers combined
with a compatible stack-allocated representation for
temporary numeric values passed between functions.
The use of stack allocation reduces the need for garbage collection
of numbers, while the uniformity of representation eliminates
the need for most run-time representation checks.
One exception to this is that the use of stack-allocated numbers
must be restricted; this difficulty is kept in check by maintaining
a careful interface between safe and unsafe uses, and analyzing
the safety of pointers as much as possible at compile time.
	While numeric functions and non-numeric functions
may call each other freely, a special interface is provided
for one numeric function to call another in such a way as to
avoid number consing.
	Arrays are stored in such a way that they may be dynamically
allocated and yet accessed quickly by compiled code.  This is aided
by the rich address arithmetic provided by the PDP-10.
	The philosophy behind the implementation
is that the generality of LISP and the speed of optimized numeric
code are not incompatible.  All that is needed is a well-chosen,
uniform representation for data objects suitable for use
by hardware instructions, combined with a willingness to handle
important special cases cleverly in the compiler.

.block 10
.sp 2
.section
References
.sp
.in 13
.un 13
[Fateman]____Fateman, Richard J.
"Reply to an Editorial."
SIGSAM Bulletin 25 (March 1973), 9-11.
.sp
.un 13
[Teitelman]__Teitelman, Warren.
InterLISP Reference Manual.
Revised edition.  Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (Palo Alto, 1975).
.in 0